KAFKA-19756: Add documentation for Gradle version upgrade process (#20741)
apache/kafka: gradle/wrapper/README.md

# Gradle Wrapper

This directory contains the Gradle wrapper files for the Apache Kafka project.

## Upgrading Gradle version

When upgrading the Gradle version used by the Kafka project, update the following files in order:

1. **Update Gradle version** in `gradle/dependencies.gradle`:
   ```groovy
   gradle: "9.2.0"
   ```

2. **Update distribution checksums** in `gradle/wrapper/gradle-wrapper.properties`:
   - Find the SHA256 checksum for the binary distribution at https://gradle.org/release-checksums/
   - Update `distributionSha256Sum` with the Binary-only (-bin) ZIP Checksum

>    - Update `distributionUrl` to point to the new version:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Update `distributionUrl` to use the latest version from `https://services.gradle.org/distributions/`:
```

Author: Thanks for the suggestions. It makes the guideline clearer.

     ```properties
     distributionSha256Sum=<sha256-checksum-from-release-page>
     distributionUrl=https\://services.gradle.org/distributions/gradle-9.2.0-bin.zip
     ```

>    - Verify the distribution URL is accessible

Reviewer: I’m not sure why this verification is needed.
The  link distribution URL in `https://services.gradle.org/distributions/` will be accessible.

Author: This is mainly to prevent Gradle from officially changing the download link in the future.

3. **Update wrapper JAR checksum** in `wrapper.gradle`:
   - Find the Wrapper JAR Checksum at https://gradle.org/release-checksums/

>    - Update the `wrapperChecksum` variable (line 42):

Reviewer: I think we shouldn't hardcode the line number here as it might change in the future.
How about:
```suggestion
   - Update the `wrapperChecksum` variable:
   ```groovy
   task bootstrapWrapper() {
    ...
    doLast {
        ...
        String wrapperChecksum = "<wrapper-jar-sha256-checksum>"
   ```
```

Author: I agree with that totally.

     ```groovy
     String wrapperChecksum = "<wrapper-jar-sha256-checksum>"
     ```
   - Verify the wrapper JAR URL is accessible at:
     `https://raw.githubusercontent.com/gradle/gradle/v<VERSION>/gradle/wrapper/gradle-wrapper.jar`

> 4. **Regenerate the wrapper script**:

Reviewer 2: Sorry, just out of curiosity, should we also update the checksum in the gradlew file?

https://github.com/apache/kafka/blob/05999c70c14ed998e4c0bc19ade1518bdc3df748/gradlew#L204

Author: We don't need to manually update the checksum in the gradlew file. When we run ./gradlew wrapper, it regenerates the gradlew based on the configuration in wrapper.gradle.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for your explanation!

# Gradle Wrapper

This directory contains the Gradle wrapper files for the Apache Kafka project.

## Upgrading Gradle version

When upgrading the Gradle version used by the Kafka project, update the following files in order:

1. **Update Gradle version** in `gradle/dependencies.gradle`:
   ```groovy
   gradle: "9.2.0"
   ```

2. **Update wrapper JAR checksum** in `wrapper.gradle`:
   - Find the Wrapper JAR Checksum at https://gradle.org/release-checksums/
   - Update the `wrapperChecksum` variable:
   ```groovy
   task bootstrapWrapper() {
       // ... (other code)
       doLast {
           // ... (other code)
           String wrapperChecksum = "<wrapper-jar-sha256-checksum>"
           // ...
       }
   }
   ```
   - Verify the wrapper JAR URL is accessible at:
     `https://raw.githubusercontent.com/gradle/gradle/v<gradle-version>/gradle/wrapper/gradle-wrapper.jar`

3. **Regenerate the `gradle/wrapper/gradle-wrapper.properties` and the wrapper script**:

>    - Find the SHA256 checksum for the binary distribution at https://gradle.org/release-checksums/

Reviewer 3: Step 2 uses "Wrapper JAR Checksum". How about we follow naming on https://gradle.org/release-checksums/ website to use "Binary-only (-bin) ZIP Checksum" here?

Author: Done

> # Gradle Wrapper

Reviewer 4: @joshua2519 could you add a comment to `gradle-wrapper.properties` to reference this file?

Author: Done.

This directory contains the Gradle wrapper files for the Apache Kafka project.

## Upgrading Gradle version

When upgrading the Gradle version used by the Kafka project, update the following files in order:

1. **Update Gradle version** in `gradle/dependencies.gradle`:
   ```groovy
   gradle: "9.2.0"
   ```

> 2. **Update distribution checksums** in `gradle/wrapper/gradle-wrapper.properties`:

Reviewer 4: Could you use `./gradlew wrapper --gradle-version 9.2.1 --distribution-type bin --gradle-distribution-sha256-sum 72f44c9f8ebcb1af43838f45ee5c4aa9c5444898b3468ab3f4af7b6076c5bc3f` instead of updating the file manually?

Author: Great idea. I've removed this part and merged the adjustments into Step 3.
Additionally, I removed the comment in gradle-wrapper.properties because it would be overridden by the wrapper task.
